Computational support has become a fundamental component of biological laboratory experiments, where large amounts of data are generated on a daily basis. The analysis of such data gives rise to new questions and further experiments, whose direction can be better decided via preliminary modelling. The more complex a biological process is, the more important computational methods become in supporting the biologist's work. ANIMO (Analysis of Networks with Interactive MOdelling) is a software tool that allows the experimental biologist to interactively explore the dynamic behaviour of signalling networks. We present here a new modelling approach that allows ANIMO to considerably increase its performances, opening the way for the analysis of bigger models, which could not otherwise be investigated by human faculties alone.

Biological systems, such as e.g. regulatory or gene networks, can be seen as a particular type of distributed systems, and for this reason they are modelled with the same tools that were developed in the computer science context. However, tools designed to model distributed systems often require a computer science background, making their use less attractive for biologists. ANIMO (Analysis of Networks with Interactive MOdelling) was built with the purpose to provide biologists with access to the powerful modelling formalism of Timed Automata without the need to learn its working. This brings computational support closer to the biological laboratories, where large amounts of data are generated on a daily basis, but where modelling is hardly ever performed. Thanks to computational models, biological data can be analysed in different ways, helping biologists to formulate new hypotheses, drive experimental research and share knowledge on biological processes.
In this paper we introduce an improved modelling approach that allows us to considerably increase ANIMO's performances, opening the way for the analysis of bigger models, which could not otherwise be investigated by human faculties alone. Moreover, this improvement makes the introduction of model checking in ANIMO a more realistic extension, allowing for reduced computation times. The user interface of ANIMO allows to rapidly build non-trivial models and check them against properties formulated in a human-readable language, making modelling an even more powerful support for the biological research.


Biological systems such as regulatory or gene networks can be seen as a particular type of distributed systems, and for this reason they can be modelled with the same tools that were developed in the computer science context. However, tools designed to model distributed systems often require a computer science background, making their use less attractive for biologists. ANIMO (Analysis of Networks with Interactive MOdelling) was built with the purpose to provide biologists with access to the powerful modelling formalism of Timed Automata in a user friendly way. Continuous dynamics is handled by discrete approximations.

This brings computational support closer to the biological laboratories, where large amounts of data are generated on a daily basis. Thanks to computational models, biological data can be analysed in different ways, helping biologists to formulate new hypotheses, drive experimental research and share knowledge on biological processes.

In this paper we introduce an improved modelling approach that allows us to considerably increase ANIMO's performances, opening the way for the analysis of bigger models. Moreover, this improvement makes the introduction of model checking in ANIMO a realistic feature, allowing for reduced computation times. The user interface of ANIMO allows to rapidly build non-trivial models and check them against properties formulated in a human-readable language, making modelling a powerful support for biological research.
